The banana is an edible fruit, botanically a berry, produced by several kinds
of large herbaceous flowering plants in the genus Musa. In some countries,
bananas used for cooking may be called plantains. The fruit is variable in
size, color and firmness, but is usually elongated and curved, with soft
flesh rich in starch covered with a rind which may be green, yellow, red,
purple, or brown when ripe. The fruits grow in clusters hanging from the top
of the plant. Almost all modern edible parthenocarpic (seedless) bananas come
from two wild species – Musa acuminata and Musa balbisiana. The scientific
names of most cultivated bananas are Musa acuminata, Musa balbisiana, and
Musa × paradisiaca for the hybrid Musa acuminata × M. balbisiana, depending
on their genomic constitution. The old scientific name Musa sapientum is no
longer used.

Musa species are native to tropical Indomalaya and Australia, and are likely to have been first domesticated in Papua New Guinea. They are grown in at least 107 countries, primarily for their fruit, and to a lesser extent to make fiber, banana wine and banana beer and as ornamental plants.

Worldwide, there is no sharp distinction between "bananas" and "plantains".
Especially in the Americas and Europe, "banana" usually refers to soft,
sweet, dessert bananas, particularly those of the Cavendish group, which are
the main exports from banana-growing countries. By contrast, Musa cultivars
with firmer, starchier fruit are called "plantains". In other regions, such
as Southeast Asia, many more kinds of banana are grown and eaten, so the
simple two-fold distinction is not useful and is not made in local languages.

The term "banana" is also used as the common name for the plants which
produce the fruit. This can extend to other members of the genus Musa like
the scarlet banana (Musa coccinea), pink banana (Musa velutina) and the Fe'i
bananas. It can also refer to members of the genus Ensete, like the snow
banana (Ensete glaucum) and the economically important false banana (Ensete
ventricosum). Both genera are classified under the banana family, Musaceae.

